Welcome back in this lesson, we're going to now look more closely at methods, and we're going to start
kind of putting a lot of these pieces together the class, the the variables and the methods.
All right.
So I have cleared out what we had in the person class because that was really just there for illustrative
purposes.
And now we're going to look at some more things that we can do with this class as pertains to methods.
So first off, let me give a little definition for what what is a method?
A method is a block of code where work gets done.
We will take a look at what I mean by a block of code, but in general, it's one or more lines of code
that are in between curly braces.
A method can take zero or more inputs, and it can return zero or one outputs in Java.
It is just about the only place where work can actually get done.
In other words, it's just about the only place where statements and commands, if you will, can actually
be executed.
If you are coming from any other programming experience, then you may already be familiar with the
concept of functions.
And if you are, then I can basically say that a method is a function.
Really, the only difference is that because Java is an object oriented language and all code has to
live inside of a class, a method is a function inside of a class.
That's that's basically it.
It's it's a function that is part of the class, whereas in non object oriented languages, especially
ones that are not as strict as Java.
You can have functions that exist on their own, like in a language like C or even C++, for that matter.
But in Java, you cannot have methods live on their own.
They have to be contained within a class.
And when they are in a class, they are no longer called functions.
They are now called methods.
So let me go ahead and create a method, and then I will break it down and explain it, and we'll look
at a few different variations of methods.
All right.
So here we are in the person class.
So the first method I'm going to create is possibly one of the simplest ones you could have.
And let's see, we'll have this method.
We'll call this.
Some say hello.
And this method is simply going to say hello.
All right.
So this is the simplest method we could have.
Now, before I explain it, not that it needs a whole lot of explanation, but before I explain it,
I also want to go ahead and run this method.
And to do that, I'm going to have to create another method and I will explain this method as well.
But probably towards the end of this lecture and you've seen some of what I'm about to do here before.
Oops.
I don't want to do that.
Let's see.
So we'll need to create an instance of a person.
And then we can call this method.
Oops.
All right.
So I'm going to go ahead and run this program and let's see what it does and then we'll go backward
and explain it.
OK, so it prints the word hello.
So let's see what we did here.
We'll start in this public static void main method.
So this main method here is just here so that we can actually run a program.
OK?
It's it's almost not even part of the class other than it needed to live in a class because those are
the rules of Java.
Methods have to be in a class.
I mean, so just out of convenience, I just put it inside of this person class.
But other than that, it kind of sort of doesn't really have anything to do with the class itself.
It's just a method that lets me run a program.
OK, but anyway, within this public static void main method, the first thing I had to do was to create
an instance of the person class.
And I'm doing that here with the new operator and the keyword new, which is that called a new operator.
So I'm telling Java create a new instance of the person class and then store a reference to this newly
created person object inside of this variable called P1, which is of type person.
Which is just to say this variable P1 consort a reference to a person.
OK.
And now that I have an instance or a reference to a person, then I can use that person on the next
line.
So I refer to that person P1.
And I want to call this method, which means I want to execute this method.
I want Javier to run whatever commands I have inside of this method.
The way that I tell Java to run this method is by first telling it what object the method belongs to,
which in this case it belongs to the P1 object.
OK, it's a person.
And then I tell it, I want you to run the say hello method of the P1 object.
OK.
And so then what ends up happening is that Java jumps into whatever statements I have within the curly
braces of this method and it starts to execute them.
And in this case, I have one statement that says to print a line of text, which is a string here.
Print that out on the monitor, basically or on the display.
So I think that's pretty self-explanatory.
Let's see.
So let's look at some of the characteristics of a method someone to put a little space in here.
OK, so first, I'm going to come back and explain the visibility.
Although we have seen a little bit of visibility on classes and visibility, rules for methods are related.
But we'll come back and do a deeper dive into that a little bit later in the discussion, OK?
So we're going to move on to the next thing.
So this next bit here is declaring what kind of data this method can output.
OK.
And in this particular case, I'm declaring that this method does not output anything.
It does not return anything, I should say.
OK.
So the word void means it does not return any data.
Now you may be scratching your head and thinking, Well, that doesn't make sense because you just ran
this program.
Say hello, and it did return something.
It printed the word hello on the screen.
Yes, it did.
But printing the word hello on the screen is not considered output from the method.
OK, so let me give you an analogy to kind of understand what's going on here.
Let's imagine that you go to a drive thru of a fast food restaurant like McDonald's if you live in the
U.S. or Canada.
You may be familiar with many McDonald's.
Maybe most of them these days have two windows.
They have the first window where you order the food and you pay them, and then they have the second
window where you where they give you the food.
Right?
Well, let's call the first window the input window, and let's call the second window the output window
where they give you the food.
OK, now let's also imagine that there is a McDonald's that has a giant electronic billboard on its
roof.
And this billboard is capable of displaying messages.
And one of the things that you can pay this McDonald's to do besides cook food for you is to display
messages on that.
Billboard, so if you were to go to the drive thru of this McDonald's and pull up to the first window
and you told them, I want you to display a message like Happy Birthday on your display board and you
pay them to do that in this particular case, and that's the only thing you're paying for.
They're not going to tell you to pull up to the second window to receive your meal because you're not
ordering any meal.
All you're doing is simply paying for them to print something on the screen.
OK?
If they're not giving you anything at the second window, you can imagine that they're not giving you
any output.
They're not giving you any output.
They are displaying a message on the screen, but they're not giving anything to you.
OK.
So this method is working very similarly to that.
This method is displaying something on the screen, but it is not returning anything to the caller.
Of this method, the thing or the person who calls this method?
OK.
So this is very similar to my analogy with McDonald's.
Now, one key distinction here is that this method is not returning any output.
It also is not taking any input.
OK.
So anything that goes between these parentheses here would be input.
And in just a moment, we'll make another method where we will pass in some input.
But I wanted this to be one of the simplest examples of a method.
And so this is intentionally a method that returns no output and takes no input.
Now, let's focus a little more on the general format of a method, though, so a method will have,
at a minimum, a return type.
It can be void, or it can be any of the data types that we were looking at in the previous lesson,
even though we didn't look at every single data type there is.
But in the previous lesson we did look at, you know, there are data types for strings and integers
and longs and bytes and cares and all of those things as well as whole entire classes.
And so all of those same data types would be valid here as well.
In addition to the word void, meaning we don't return anything.
OK.
And that's why we wanted to make sure we learned about data types just a little bit before we jumped
into here.
So let's talk about the standard naming patterns for Java methods Java methods.
Ideally, should have a verb in them.
They don't have to.
There's nothing that's going to force that to be the case, but I'm strongly recommending that method
names should have verbs because methods do actions.
They do something.
OK?
They're not nouns.
They actually do some function, right?
They they do an action.
So ideally they should always have a verb in them.
So in this case, say hello.
The word say is a verb.
Methods start with a lowercase.
Again, this is simply a standard convention of Java.
It is not a hard, fast rule.
There's nothing that will stop you from using all uppercase or starting with an uppercase, but that
is not the standard way that Java code is written.
And so I would recommend that you stick with these standards.
And then the the other naming rules that we've already talked about, like you can't start with a number,
but you can have numbers in the middle or at the end and underscores and all of that, all the rest
of those rules are generally about the same.
OK, then a method name must always be followed by parentheses, just as I have here.
That's a big part of what makes it a method.
In fact, if you don't have these, it's an error.
OK?
So you have to have the parentheses.
Now, technically, the I.D is allowing me to have space between the method name and the parentheses,
but I would strongly recommend don't do that.
And in fact, I don't think I've ever seen any code actually do that in Java, so I would stay away
from that.
But technically it is permitting it.
All right.
And then the next significant thing would be the opening curly brace.
So just like we have the opening curly brace for a class, we have an opening curly brace for the method
and that just tells the Java system.
Here comes the beginning of the body of our method, and this line here would be in the body of this
method.
And then when we're done with our method, we have a closing brace as well, just like a class.
Notice, by the way, that intelligence and all modern ideas for this matter, if you put your cursor
right at a an opening or closing curly brace, the idea will highlight that curly brace and it will
also highlight the corresponding closing curly brace.
And that's just a nice convenience to let you know where really is the end of this method or in the
case of the class, where's the end of that class right down there?
OK.
And then the space that I have here is not technically required, but again, I like to put that space
there for readability.
So these are just standards that you will hopefully get used to.
All right.
And then inside of the method, we've got a what's called a statement, you can think of it like a sentence
or a command.
OK, so we're we're commanding the Java system in this case to print a line of text and we're ending
it with a semicolon because statements and declarations must be ended with semicolons.
All right.
So now let's move on to another method.
Let's make a very similar one.
I don't know.
We'll start with one.
That's Floyd.
Say something.
But this one, this method will take an input.
So let's have it take input of some text that we wanted to say on the screen.
OK, so since it's text, it's going to be of type string.
And then I need to name a variable here that I will use to refer to the text that we want to print later
on in the body of the method.
I'm just going to call it something.
I could name this pretty much anything.
I could call it text or message.
OK.
It doesn't really matter.
I guess I'll leave it at message.
All right.
And then I need to close that parentheses space.
And then opening and closing curly braces.
Now, notice the I.D. I typed just the opening curly brace, but the I.D. added in the closing curly
brace for me automatically and then put my cursor right in between those two.
And it's basically waiting for me to hit return.
And then it puts the cursor right, indented where I want to be.
That's another thing as well.
Notice the indentation here now.
The indentation doesn't matter.
Whitespace like all the spaces and everything, for the most part, don't really matter in Java.
These indentations are really for humans to be able to read the code a little more clearly.
If every line of code was at the same level of indentation.
It would be a little harder for our eyes to parse.
Where do methods begin and end and what's inside of them?
And so by convention, we tend to indent inside of any block of code.
And basically, a block of code is any code that is within curly braces.
OK.
So any time you've got curly braces and then you have code in between those curly braces, you typically
will want to indent and we'll see more of that as we go.
All right.
So let's make this do something.
So I'm going to do another system now that print line.
And this time we wanted to print whatever message is past thin.
So the message that's passed in is called message.
That's the name of the variable that we're using here.
OK.
And so if I want it to print whatever was passed in here, then I will refer back to that variable name
here as well.
Now, notice this time because we're not printing a static string like, hello, we're printing whatever
is passed into this method.
I don't use quotation marks now.
I can't use quotation marks, in fact, because we're using this as a variable.
So we don't want to.
We don't want it to quote the word message literally, right?
We want it to interpret whatever message or words or text or are referenced by this variable and then
print that.
And let's see an example of how to use that.
So if we come down here, we can say p one dot say something.
My groovy message.
Now notice down here I am putting the text that I want to pass into this method in quotation marks.
I'm telling this method.
I want you to say literally these words, OK.
And what's happening here is a reference to this text is being stored in this variable called message
so that I can refer to it within the body of my method.
OK.
I want to make this overly complicated.
So basically, just say that a little more simplistically, this text gets stored in this variable so
that I can use it, and I could call this method multiple times also.
Here's something else to say, and then I can run this.
OK, so we get hello.
Then we get my groovy message and then we get here's something else to say.
So hopefully that that makes good sense to you.
OK, so now let's make another method.
Let's make a method that returns some output, and I'm going to give myself a little room here.
I'm going to close the little output window there for a moment.
OK, so let's say that the person class has a field called middle name, and I'm going to initialize
this for right now, just for convenience sake.
OK.
And then let's say that we want a method that can return the middle initial.
So and let's say that the middle initial should be a character.
OK, so we're saying we want a method that can return a character of the middle initial of the middle
name.
OK.
Just the initials of the middle name.
So then the next bit of this method is whatever the return type is, which in this case, I just said
we want the middle initial and we want to model that middle initial as a character.
So then I would say that the return type for this method is is of type, care, KTAR, and then I need
to give a name to this method.
And since the purpose of this method is to return a middle initial, I'm going to call this method get
middle initial.
OK, so notice, I said that methods really should have a verb in their name, and so my verb is get.
OK, get middle initial that that lets the reader of this code understand pretty intuitively what this
method does.
It gets a middle initial as opposed to naming this method.
Middle initial.
Well, OK.
What about a middle initial?
What are we doing with it?
Are we setting it, getting it?
Guessing it?
What are we doing with it?
OK, so we'll call it get middle initial and it doesn't need to take any input because it'll just work
off of the data that is already contained within the object.
So in that case, I can just use two parentheses with nothing in the middle.
And then I need an opening curly brace and then I get a closing one automatically and then I can hit
return and I can start doing something here.
All right.
So purpose of this lesson isn't to teach you everything you can do with strings and characters, but
I'm just going to show you a quick example here of how I can do this.
So in this case, now I need to use a special keyword if I want to return some data from my method.
Then I need to use the special keyword return and then I need to tell it what to return.
OK, now obviously what I want to return is just the first character of the middle name string.
OK, this middle name string here and the way I can do that is to reference the middle name first.
So middle name is a string string is a class.
The string class has a whole lot of methods on it for doing all kinds of convenient things.
And so and I just happen to know that.
So I'm going to look for some of the methods that are on this class string.
And one of the methods that's on it is a method called care at.
And I know that I said methods should have a verb.
And here's an example of a method that was made by the creators of Java that has no verb care at.
What are you going to do?
You still should have a verb in your methods.
Don't do as they do in this particular case.
All right.
Care at and what this wants me to tell it is the index within the string of the character that I want
to grab.
And all that means is like, Well, which character do I want to grab out of here?
I want the first character and the first character in terms of Java programming here as an index would
be the zero with character.
And that's because in a lot of programming, counting and numbers and indexes and things start with
zero zero is oftentimes the first number in a lot of programming.
And so if I pass in a zero here as the input to this method and then close that with a semicolon, I
am telling the care at method to give me the first the zero with or the first character of the middle
name string, which would be this C right here.
OK.
Return that, and then I can call this method and see if that's working.
So let's see.
I can do a print line.
And I will simply refer to this method now, here's an interesting thing that you haven't seen yet so
far, you've seen things like print line print, a constant string, we've passed in a string variable.
Now we will pass in down here, a method itself and in here we'll do it.
Just like this will call p one dot get middle initial just like that.
So you can pass in a method into another method as long as whatever comes out of that is valid.
In other words, the print line method can take as input a few different forms of text, and as long
as the method you're calling is capable of returning one of those forms of text that the that the print
line method accepts, it's all good.
OK, it's equivalent to just returning that text or whatever that input type is directly.
All right.
So let's run this.
And there we go.
We have just an uppercase C.
All right, now, let's look at a method that takes both input and output.
I'm going to make a method that won't really make a lot of sense for a person class, just for lack
of imagination here.
Let's make a method that can add two numbers together and then return the sum of those numbers, which
will also let us take a look at methods that take more than one input.
OK, so let's make a method that can take two integers specifically and return an integer so it returns
an integer, right?
So then we're going to say that the return type is Ent..
And then this method can add two numbers, so we can just call this method add it's a verb, and now
we need to specify the input types.
So just like we did up here, we first had to specify what type of data we're allowing to input, followed
by a name for the variable that we're going to use to refer to it.
So we're going to allow this to input an integer.
So we'll say int space and then this method is going to take two numbers.
So I'm just going to call the variable this first variable or this first input num one.
Now here's something you haven't seen.
How do you allow a method to accept multiple inputs?
Well, you already have all the building blocks you need.
The only thing you need to know is that you need a comma.
OK.
So with a comma, we can specify additional inputs and then we're going to have a second number that
we can take.
And that's also going to be an integer.
So we'll see again and space and another name for the variable.
And in this case, we'll call it NUM two, and that's all we want.
So then I will close that and then I'll do a space and then my curly braces and then hit return.
OK, now I want to return the sum of NUM one and number two.
So I'm going to first use the keyword return space.
And now I can do math on variables.
I can especially do simple math on variables.
So this will be easy and we'll learn more about this in a another lesson on numbers and stuff, but
we'll get a little sneak preview here.
NUM one plus NUM two and then semicolon to close this statement.
The space here is not necessary.
I just have it here for readability because I think what?
The space looks a little easier for my eyes to pass then without the space.
All right.
And now we can run.
Well, we can use.
We can call this add method.
So let's see here.
We'll do.
We'll do another system that out that print line and we can call P1 dot add and add two numbers five
comma three, just like that.
And then let's run this.
OK, and now we get that on the last line.
Eight.
So we know that that worked.
OK, before we wrap up this lesson.
I want to clarify one or two points earlier in this lesson.
You may have understood that I was saying that we were passing in this get middle initial method into
the print line method here that is not technically accurate.
What we are actually doing is we are calling the get middle initial method and then it is returning
a character which in this case would be the first character of this string, which is a C.
So it's returning a character of C here.
And then it is that character C that is being passed into the print line method.
So in other words, making this call P1 get middle initial would be somewhat equivalent to.
That.
OK.
That is effectively what's being what's what's happening there.
That's a little bit different.
From saying that we are actually passing this method itself into this method, that's not quite what
we're doing, we're passing the output of this method into this method.
OK.
One other thing I want to point out, since you have learned about variables is another way that we
could have done.
This would have been to simply capture the output of this method first.
And one way that we could do that is by introducing a variable.
So we could.
Yeah, I'm going to just use an I.D. keyboard shortcut here to introduce a variable.
OK.
So what I just did there was we're still calling P1 to get middle initial, but now we're capturing
the output of this call, which is the letter C, a character C.
We're capturing that C in this little variable here called middle initial.
And again, I could call this variable anything.
The ID is smart enough to know that if I have a method called get middle initial, that a good name
for the variable might just be the word middle initial with the M lowercase and to remove the word,
get the reason it knew to remove the word.
Get, by the way, is because get and set are very common parts of method names.
And so it understood if you've got a method that starts with the word, get whatever it is that it gets
is probably the the rest of the method name.
I'll just remove the word get and then put a lowercase on the first letter.
So that's how it came up with that name.
But I could have I could have named it anything.
So we're capturing the first letter of the middle initial C in this variable, and then we're using
that variable here to pass in what we want to the print line.
OK, so this is equivalent to the only reason I didn't do this initially was because it's an extra line
of code and a lot of programmers are a little bit lazy.
There sometimes are good reasons why I might have wanted to capture this, though, if I wasn't sure
what was going on or if I wasn't sure what was going to be in this variable.
Or rather, if I wasn't sure what was coming out of this method call, I might have captured it first
so that I could inspect it while the program was running something like that.
OK, so this is equivalent.
And then I could put this back the way it was by just getting rid of that variable and just have the
method call inside of the parentheses.
OK, but I'm not passing this method into this method.
I'm passing the output of this method into this method.
OK, so small clarification.
I wanted to point out there.
Same thing here on Line twenty eight.
OK, so we're going to go out and wrap this lesson up.
We've covered a lot.
I know that.
And in the next lesson, we will get into static methods since we didn't get a chance to get to that
yet in this lesson.
So I will see you in the next one.